Add Gatsby + Tina 101 Blog (#113)
tinacms/tinacms.org: content/blog/gatsby-tina-101.md

    details: Demonstrates use of RemarkCreatorPlugin
---

> Static site generators like [Gatsby](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/) are a huge win for developers. They provide us with easy deployments, faster development cycles, and reduced security burden.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Static site generators like [Gatsby](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/) are a massive win for developers. They provide us with automated deployments, faster development cycles, and reduced security burden.
```

> Despite the techincal gains, static sites can have a hampered content editing story. Those comfortable with Git and Markdown might edit files directly. But content authors need a better solution for editing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Despite the technical gains, static sites can have a hampered content editing story. Those comfortable with Git and Markdown might edit files directly. But content authors need a better solution for editing.
```

> [TinaCMS](https://tinacms.org/docs/getting-started/introduction) is a _extensible_ toolkit that can help meet these needs. Tina allows developers to use formats we love, like Markdown and JSON, while providing a slick experience for content authors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[TinaCMS](https://tinacms.org/docs/getting-started/introduction) is an _extensible_ toolkit that can help meet these needs. Tina allows developers to use formats we love, like Markdown and JSON, while providing a slick experience for content authors.
```

To understand better how Tina works, I decided to add it to an existing site, my [Gatsby starter, _Tyra_](https://github.com/madelyneriksen/gatsby-starter-tyra/). What follows is a walkthrough of my process. Feel free to use this as a reference for adding TinaCMS to an existing Gatsby site!

> **In a rush?** _Check out the code [on Github](https://github.com/madelyneriksen/gatsby-starter-tyra)_

## Getting Started with Tina

> Tina is a non-intrusive library you can use to add editing capabilities to your site. All your page generation logic can remain _exactly_ the same. This makes it easier to 'drop in' dynamic content editing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tina is a non-intrusive library you can use to add editing capabilities to your site. All your page generation logic can remain _exactly_ the same, making it easier to 'drop-in' dynamic content editing.
```

> There are a collection of plugins you will need to install and register with Gatsby to add Tina into your site. Let's do that now.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are a collection of plugins you need to install and register with Gatsby to add Tina to your site. Let's do that now.
```

### Installing Tina

> Like most things in the Javascript world, we can install the packages we need with `npm` or `yarn`. Use whichever package manager is relevant for your project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Like most things in the JavaScript world, we can install the packages we need with `npm` or `yarn`. Use whichever package manager is relevant for your project.
```

```bash
# With npm
npm i --save gatsby-plugin-tinacms gatsby-tinacms-git gatsby-tinacms-remark styled-components

# Or using Yarn
yarn add gatsby-plugin-tinacms gatsby-tinacms-git gatsby-tinacms-remark styled-components
```

> This command adds the Gatsby plugins for Tina itself, to interface Git with Tina, and to support markdown files (via Remark). Since _Tyra_ already had the `gatsby-transformer-remark` plugin and all related dependencies installed, I only needed to install plugins specific to TinaCMS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command adds the Gatsby plugins for Tina itself, to interface Git with Tina, and to support Markdown files (via Remark). Since _Tyra_ already had the `gatsby-transformer-remark` plugin and all related dependencies installed, I only needed to install plugins specific to TinaCMS.
```

}
```

_Tyra_ uses Markdown for content, but TinaCMS also supports JSON files via [gatsby-tinacms-json](https://tinacms.org/docs/gatsby/json/). I find that JSON is great for page content and [blocks](https://tinacms.org/blog/what-are-blocks/). But for simple blog posts, Markdown works great.

> Since the content _Tyra_ is Git based, all edits will need to be committed back into the repository. `gatsby-tinacms-git` tracks content changes and handles the creation of new commits with content. By default, changes are pushed to a remote branch, but the plugin is configurable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the content _Tyra_ is Git-based, all edits need to be committed back into the repository. `gatsby-tinacms-git` tracks content changes and handles the creation of new commits with content. By default, changes are pushed to a remote branch, but the plugin is configurable.
```

  }
`

// Pass in the component to wrap and configuration object
export default inlineRemarkForm(Post, { queryName: 'post' })
```

> `inlineRemarkForm` will take our `Post` component as an argument and return a component wrapped with Tina plumbing. [Higher-Order Components](https://reactjs.org/docs/higher-order-components.html) inject custom logic into existing React components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`inlineRemarkForm` takes our `Post` component as an argument and return a component wrapped with Tina plumbing. [Higher-Order Components](https://reactjs.org/docs/higher-order-components.html) inject custom logic into existing React components.
```

> In our GraphQL query, we've added a fragment, `TinaRemark`. This pulls out extra data for Tina to edit files. I also used a non-standard query name for my post data (`post`). Thankfully, it's easy to change what data Tina uses by passing in a configuration object to `inlineRemarkForm`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our GraphQL query, we've added a fragment, `TinaRemark`, that pulls out extra data for Tina to edit files. I also used a non-standard query name for my post data (`post`). Thankfully, it's easy to change what data Tina uses by passing in a configuration object to `inlineRemarkForm`.
```

At this point, if we start our application, we can hop over to [localhost:8000](http://localhost:8000/) and see that Tina is working!

```bash
npm start
```

Navigate to a blog post and click the "Pencil" icon in the bottom left-hand corner. The Tina sidebar should appear and let you edit your Markdown posts.

![Woohoo! Markdown editing is working!](/img/blog/gatsby-tina-101/madalyn_blog_1.png)

> Awesome right? Here I've changed the author from "Jane Doe" to "Madelyn Eriksen". I can actually save those changes in the Tina sidebar too. That process triggers an automatic commit in `git` and will push to a remote branch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Awesome right? Here I've changed the author from "Jane Doe" to "Madelyn Eriksen". I can save those changes in the Tina sidebar too. That process triggers an automatic commit in `git` and will push to a remote branch.
```

> How Tina interacts with git is completely configurable. It's possible to change the commit message, disable automatic commits, or even change the git user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
How Tina interacts with git is entirely configurable. It's possible to change the commit message, disable automatic commits, or even change the git user.
```

### Friendly Form Fields

> Right now our sidebar forms for editing are 'okay,' but there's room for improvement. It would be a lot nicer if the form fields labelled with things like `rawFrontmatter.title`. Our content authors would likely not appreciate labels like that!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Right now our sidebar forms for editing are 'okay,' but there's room for improvement. It would be a lot nicer if the form fields weren't labeled with things like `rawFrontmatter.title`. Our content authors would likely not appreciate labels like that!
```

There are also fields _Tyra_ uses that should be "private" and not available to edit in the sidebar. For example, the `type` frontmatter value to identify posts.

> We can configure the sidebar form by passing in a `FormConfig` object to Tina. [Customizing forms with Tina](https://tinacms.org/docs/gatsby/markdown/#customizing-remark-forms) is straightforward. We only need to define a Javascript object to declare the desired form fields for Tina to render.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can configure the sidebar form by passing in a `FormConfig` object to Tina. [Customizing forms with Tina](https://tinacms.org/docs/gatsby/markdown/#customizing-remark-forms) is straightforward. We need to define a JavaScript object to declare the desired form fields for Tina to render.
```

      description: `Write your blog post here!`,
      component: `markdown`,
    },
  ],
}

// Pass in FormConfig
export default inlineRemarkForm(Post, FormConfig)
```

In the `FormConfig`, we're using `text`, `markdown`, `date`, and even `image` fields to make the post authoring experience nicer. Tina has [a bunch](https://tinacms.org/docs/fields/) of built-in fields, and even allows you to [add your own](https://tinacms.org/docs/fields/custom-fields).

> The `image` field can be tricky to configure. For the _post image_, we need Tina to handle image uploads, as well as update previews. To configure uploads, you declare the upload directory and parse out a preview thumbnail from uploaded image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `image` field can be tricky to configure. For the _post image_, we need Tina to handle image uploads, as well as update previews. To configure uploads, you declare the upload directory and parse out a preview thumbnail from the uploaded image.
```

![We have a sidebar that's nice!](/img/blog/gatsby-tina-101/madalyn_blog_2.png)

> > **Note:** While editing, there may be fields that don't have values or are not filled. In this case, it's important to make sure your site can handle empty field values and not 'blow up.'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note:** While editing, there may be fields that don't have values or are not filled. In this case, it's essential to make sure your site can handle empty field values and not 'blow up.'
```

}
```

> We can toggle the "editing mode" through a simple button that will display right above the post. That said, the toggle can be anything you want! Fancier options could look like using [React Portals](https://reactjs.org/docs/portals.html) to render buttons elsewhere in the DOM, or listening to click or keyboard events.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can toggle the "editing mode" through a simple button that displays right above the post. That said, the toggle can be anything you want! Fancier options could look like using [React Portals](https://reactjs.org/docs/portals.html) to render buttons elsewhere in the DOM, or listening to click or keyboard events.
```

### Adding Inline Editing

> Now the complicated part- adding inline editing. Did I say complicated? It's actually only four lines of code! 🥳

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now the complicated part- adding inline editing. Did I say complicated? It's only four lines of code! 🥳
```

</TinaField>
```

Since it's wrapping Markdown body, we assign the `name` prop the value `rawMarkdownBody`. To render the WYSIWYG editor, we pass in the `Wysiwyg` component from `@tinacms/fields` as a property. Tina renders this component when "edit mode" is active.

Of course, we also have to import the relevant Tina components to be able to _use_ them:

```javascript
import { Wysiwyg } from '@tinacms/fields'
import { TinaField } from '@tinacms/form-builder'
```

> With those code snippets added, we can actually use the inline editor to change a blog post!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With those code snippets added, we can use the inline editor to change a blog post!
```

![Woah! Now that's fancy.](/img/blog/gatsby-tina-101/madalyn_blog_4.png)

> To finish of our editing experience, all we really need is the ability to add new posts using Tina!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To finish off our editing experience, all we really need is the ability to add new posts using Tina!
```

export default CreatePostPlugin
```

`RemarkCreatorPlugin` from `gatsby-tinacms-remark` uses a configuration object to instantiate a new 'content-creator' plugin. Note that defining `fields` in the config object follows the same pattern as those seen in content editing forms.

> You also can control the generated frontmatter using the `frontmatter` property. Tina expects a function that transforms an object with form values into an object that becomes the frontmatter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You also can control the generated front matter using the `frontmatter` property. Tina expects a function that transforms an object with form values into an object that becomes the front matter.
```

  </React.Fragment>
)

// Export Layout with CreatePostPlugin
export default withPlugin(Layout, CreatePostPlugin)
```

> `withPlugin` is another Higher-Order Component — it adds a plugin to the Tina sidebar when the component it wraps is being rendered. Since `Layout` is at the root of every page in _Tyra_, content authors can add posts from anywhere in the site!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`withPlugin` is another Higher-Order Component — it adds a plugin to the Tina sidebar when the component it wraps is being rendered. Since `Layout` is at the root of every page in _Tyra_, content authors can add posts from anywhere on the site!
```

> Now we can use our new plugin in the sidebar! Hitting the "plus" icon in the sidebar will provide an option to create a new blog post. If we click that, our plugin's form pops up in a modal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we can use our new plugin in the sidebar! Hitting the "plus" icon in the sidebar provides an option to create a new blog post. When we click it, our plugin's form pops up in a modal.
```

![We can create new posts!](/img/blog/gatsby-tina-101/madalyn_blog_5.png)

## Conclusions + Next Steps

That's all it takes to create a basic blog CMS with Tina! 🎉 We've allowed content authors to easily create and edit new posts, right on the blog itself. You can check out the finished result over [on Github](TODO: Github Link)!

> This only scratches the surface of what you can build using Tina. If you want to go further, there's several more advanced features you can use to expand your Gatsby site!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We only scratched the surface of what you can build using Tina. If you want to go further, there are several more advanced features you can use to expand your Gatsby site!
```
